#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Subsubsection

\lang british
Anchoring vignettes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
Anchoring vignettes are intended to help correct for differential item functioni
ng (DIF) or, equivalently, differing happiness reporting functions across
 individuals.
 Respondents making self-assessments on a scale are asked to assess on the
 same scale each of several hypothetical individuals described by very short
 profiles (the vignettes).
 Answers to the vignette assessments, which have actual (but not reported)
 levels of the variables that are the same for every respondent, are then
 used to adjust the self-assessments, so as to create interpersonally comparable
 measurements.
 The use of anchoring vignettes assumes that respondents use the response
 scale for their self-assessments in the same way that they it for their
 vignette assessments (response consistency), and that the vignettes are
 understood in the same way by all respondents (vignette equivalence) 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "king:2003"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph

\lang british
Vignettes for life satisfaction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
For a number of reasons, the use of vignettes for life satisfaction should
 be regarded as somewhat experimental.
 Some have suggested that vignettes be used only for concepts that are unidimens
ional 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "king:2006"

\end_inset

, while life satisfaction is arguably a quantity with many dimensions.
 It could also be argued that the use of vignettes in subjective wellbeing
 research is more fundamentally misconceived: how can a (hypothetical) person's
 
\emph on
subjective
\emph default
 wellbeing be assessed from outside? On the other hand, the self-assessment
 and vignette items used in this study ask about life satisfaction, a wellbeing
 concept that is predominantly cognitive/evaluative---and one which respondents
 could arguably make an educated guess at, given some observable facts.
 If respondents are able to answer vignette questions about life satisfaction,
 their answers may provide valuable information on how they are using the
 response scale for their self-assessments; these outcomes are not certain,
 however.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
One existing application of anchoring vignettes to life satisfaction measures
 is known.
 The 2006 wave of the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe
 (SHARE) uses two vignettes to assess life satisfaction of retired people:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\family sans
\lang british
John is 63 years old.
 His wife died 2 years ago and he still spends a lot of time thinking about
 her.
 He has 4 children and 10 grandchildren who visit him regularly.
 John can make ends meet but has no money for extras such as expensive gifts
 to his grandchildren.
 He has had to stop working recently due to heart problems.
 He gets tired easily.
 Otherwise, he has no serious health conditions.
 How satisfied with his life do you think John is? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\family sans
\lang british
Carry is 72 years old and a widow.
 Her total after tax income is about €1,100 per month.
 She owns the house she lives in and has a large circle of friends.
 She plays bridge twice a week and goes on vacation regularly with some
 friends.
 Lately she has been suffering from arthritis, which makes working in the
 house and garden painful.
 How satisfied with her life do you think Carry is?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
This survey data has been used by 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "angelini:2008"

\end_inset

 to help explain surprising disparities in standard (uncorrected) life satisfact
ion scores between residents of different European nations.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph

\lang british
Vignette design
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
Devising a vignette question involves selecting attributes of the hypothetical
 individual to be described, selecting the levels of those attributes, in
 plausible combinations, and then selecting a particular ordering and phrasing
 of these attribute levels within the vignette.
 Since each of these selections is made from an effectively unlimited set
 of possibilities, the process is a significantly subjective and intuitive
 one.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\lang british
It is potentially also a process which might usefully be guided by qualitative
 research (using focus groups, for example).
 However, there was not time for such research to be carried out within
 the present study.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
To provide the greatest discriminatory power, vignette responses should
 be spaced evenly throughout the distribution of self-assessment responses
 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "king:2006"

\end_inset

.
 For example, if using one vignette, the median response should match the
 median self-assessment response; if using a set of four, the median responses
 would ideally fall near the quintiles---the 20th, 40th, 60th and 80th percentil
es---of the self-assessment.
 This cannot be guaranteed in advance, of course, since it is a property
 of the empirical data collected; but existing data on self-assessments,
 and the results of piloting, can help in approaching it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
In this study, it was decided to use four vignettes---which can be used
 create a 9-point DIF-free scale
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\lang british
Those assessing themselves lower than they assess the lowest of the vignettes
 are at the bottom of the scale, at position 1; those assessing themselves
 as tied with the lowest are one step up, at position 2; those assessing
 themselves as between the lowest and second-lowest vignette are at position
 3; and so on.
\end_layout

\end_inset

---and to present these to all respondents.
 The ESS Round 3 data set was used as a guideline for devising vignettes
 with responses at the appropriate levels.
 In this data set, the quintiles of the LS item (B24) responses are at 6,
 7, 8 and 9 on the 0 -- 10 scale.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
A simple Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression was run, having the LS
 item as the dependent variable, and a number of items that are usually
 significantly associated with LS scores as independent variables.
 These variables included age, age squared, household income, and dummies
 relating to country of residence, gender, marital status, having children,
 health, and social contact.
 The coefficients from this regression were then used to predict LS self-ratings
 for hypothetical individuals with a series of plausible combinations of
 the independent variables (UK resident in every case), and four such combinatio
ns---with predicted self-ratings of approximately 6, 7, 8 and 9---were used
 as the starting point for the four vignettes.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\lang british
This approach to predicting vignette item responses is subject to many limitatio
ns.
 For example, the use of OLS assumes cardinality of responses, which may
 not be justified; none of the independent variables are interacted, although
 it seems probable that the effects on LS ratings of some items are not
 independent; and, most fundamentally, it is not clear that individuals
 will be aware of the normal direction and magnitude of influences on LS.
 However, because the regression was used only as a starting point for the
 vignette items---which were piloted, and in some cases amended on that
 basis---these limitations do not present any problem here.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "king:2006"

\end_inset

 suggests excluding age from vignettes, and matching the sex (and cultural
 origin) of the names used in vignettes with those of respondent.
 However, in this case such a strategy was judged to potentially jeopardise
 the comparability of the vignettes presented to different respondents.
 For example, respondents might judge the LS effects of childlessness differentl
y by age and gender, and many occupations and hobbies might draw more attention
 in association with one gender than the other (in the case of a female
 builder, say, or a male netball player).
 Age and gender were therefore fixed for each vignette.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
Within genders, it was decided to investigate whether the use of different
 names had any association with LS ratings.
 For three of the vignettes, the name of the hypothetical individual was
 picked at random from a set of four, and presented, again at random, in
 either a full or abbreviated form.
 The set of four names was pre-selected from a list of the top ten names
 given to newborns of the same gender in the UK during the decade of the
 individual's birth (from 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citealp
key "askoxford.com:2009"

\end_inset

).
 For the fourth vignette, the name was picked at random from a set of 15,
 composed of three names each of Arabic, Chinese, Indian, Spanish, and UK
 origin (from 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citealp
key "hanks:2006"

\end_inset

).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
The vignettes were all answered on the same 0 -- 10 scale as the LS item,
 and were as follows:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\family sans
\lang british
[Name] is 42 years old.
 He's single, and has no children.
 He makes £70,000 a year in a professional job, but some colleagues have
 recently been laid off and his position isn't secure.
 Outside work [Name] watches a lot of television, and sees friends for a
 drink about once a month.
 He's slightly overweight, and carries an inhaler for his asthma.
 How satisfied with his life as a whole do you think [Name] is?
\family default

\begin_inset VSpace smallskip
\end_inset


\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

[Name] is one of: Jonathan, John, Stephen, Steve, Andrew, Andy, Robert,
 Rob.
 Approximate predicted LS rating is 6.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\family sans
\lang british
[Name] is 33 years old.
 She got divorced 2 years ago, and during the week she looks after her 9-year-ol
d son on her own.
 [Name] earns £20,000 a year in a public sector job.
 She's in good health, and has a circle of close friends whom she sees fairly
 regularly.
 How satisfied with her life as a whole do you think [Name] is?
\family default

\begin_inset VSpace medskip
\end_inset


\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

[Name] is one of: Joanne, Jo, Samantha, Sam, Nicola, Nicky, Rebecca, Becky.
 Approximate predicted LS rating is 7.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\family sans
\lang british
[Name] is 25 years old.
 He's married, without children, and works full-time from home.
 Between them, he and his wife bring home £40,000 a year.
 They go out with family or friends most weeks.
 [Name] keeps in good shape, and plays football most weekends.
 How satisfied with his life as a whole do you think [Name] is?
\family default

\begin_inset VSpace medskip
\end_inset


\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

[Name] is one of: Yusuf, Hakim, Ahmad, Rajiv, Govind, Prabhu, Li, Cheng,
 Xin, Fernando, Miguel, Pablo, James, Daniel, Matthew.
 Approximate predicted LS rating is 8.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate

\family sans
\lang british
[Name] is 58 years old.
 She's married, with two grown-up children, and works for a large, successful
 firm.
 She and her husband have a combined income of £200,000 a year.
 They entertain or go out with friends once or twice a week, and take several
 holidays a year.
 [Name] is close to her family, and looks forward to seeing more of her
 grandchildren when she retires.
 How satisfied with her life as a whole do you think [Name] is?
\family default

\begin_inset VSpace medskip
\end_inset


\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

[Name] is one of: Susan, Sue, Elizabeth, Liz, Margaret, Maggie, Patricia,
 Pat.
 Approximate predicted LS rating is 9.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
The order of presentation of the four vignettes was randomised per respondent,
 as ordering effects have previously been demonstrated in vignettes research
 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "buckley:2008"

\end_inset

.
 The vignette items were placed on a page immediately following the LS self-asse
ssment item.
 It has recently been suggested, contrary to previous practice, that placing
 the vignette items 
\emph on
before 
\emph default
the self-assessment item may prime respondents to understand the response
 scale in a common way 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "hopkins:2008"

\end_inset

.
 However, since the LS item in this survey was also to be used independently
 of the vignette data, it was felt important not to alter the response context
 for this item.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\lang british
The presentation and rubric for the vignette items can be seen on 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
hyperlink{ssa.9}{pages SA-9 -- SA-10}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 of 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand formatted
reference "app:survey-screenshots"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
